Okay, this is Ron Shorn at the Berkeley American
Astronomical Society meeting, June 10th, 1993,
and I'm talking with Brad Smith. Brad, for the
record, would you give your full name? Bradford A.
Smith. Okay, when did you get into planetary
astronomy? 1955.
Okay, and where and doing what? I was in the Army and
assigned to work with Clyde Tombaugh at Lowell
Observatory in what was then the New Mexico
College of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts.
Tombaugh was conducting a search for
earth-orbiting
satellites, small earth-orbiting satellites,
and the Army Map Service, specifically John
O'Keefe, sent me to to the southwest to work with
Tombaugh.
When you first broke into the racket, were you
aware of any bias against the planetary solar
system work on the part of real astronomers, say,
for example, people that work on galaxies or stars
and mammals and various other places? Hey, I
started off with Tombaugh. I was thrown into the
bias issue right at the very beginning. and had
other contacts with Kuiper. So I was very familiar
with the bias against so-called planetary
astronomy. Do you think any of that had to do with
the fact that there was kind of an instrumental
barrier, namely infrared detectors were junk and
that's where the spectral information was,
photometry was pretty poor to get any information
out of that? Or was it personal, or was it Percival
Lowell, or was it a combination? I think people
like Lowell probably had some effect on this
attitude, but the attitude seemed to be a fairly
general one. That is, people who study the planets
just aren't doing serious astronomy. tendencies
continue today, many astronomers feel that if
you're not doing cosmological extragalactic
astronomy and just playing around our own galaxy,
you're not doing serious astronomy. So these
things just come about depending upon what's in
vogue at the time. Do you think planetary
astronomy is astronomy? Of course it's
astronomy. Do you think the general public thinks
planetary astronomy is astronomy? Very
definitely. When did you first cross paths with
NSA? With NASA? When they were created. In what
way? Tombo and I both had proposals and we were
funded very early on among, I guess, among the very
first NASA grants that were provided by the
fledgling NASA. Do you remember what that was for?
Yeah, I can remember what some of them were for. We
had, both Tombaugh and I, had come to the
conclusion, I'm sure others as well, that the
planetary work that was being done at Lowell and
Lick and various other places, they tended to
concentrate on taking observations,
photographs, when everything was just right. You
know, a close Mars opposition, when Jupiter was in
opposition. And I wanted to get involved in
synoptic observations, to look at the planets
every night, whether it was good seeing or bad
seeing, whether it was close to opposition or far.
And so we put in a proposal to do this using a
telescope that was left over from Tombaugh's
satellite search program. That was the basis of
the original support from NASA. Where do you think
planetary astronomy would be today without the
money that NASA has spent on it in the last 30 years?
Well, that's a little hard to judge. I mean, after
all, if NASA were to stop their support right now,
there would be a real hiatus in ground-based
planetary astronomy because the NSF doesn't have
a recent history of supporting planetary
astronomy. I really don't know. Planets became
more important as the technology developed to
study them. And if there had been no NASA, I would
guess that at some level, the NSF would have
provided support for studies of planets. But
without question, it was boosted by NASA's need to
have ground-based support for their flight
programs. In general, how's your relationship
been with NSA? In other words, do you have any
complements, any gripes? No, I've had a very good
relationship with NASA. Money is always short,
and there's always a fight for funds. And that gets
the problems becoming exacerbated when the
funding really drops down as it is right now. But I
certainly don't have any long-term complaints
now. Do you think planetary astronomers have done
a good job of selling themselves to the public and
to Congress? I think they've done an especially
good job. I know many people in the astrophysics
area who sort of look at solar system astronomers
as a model for what they should be doing in trying to
promote programs and get support. It's been 30
years now of modern planetary astronomy. or more,
and both from the ground and from space probes and
from landings and everything, we haven't found a
single trace of present or past life anywhere in
the solar system except Earth, and in particular
no little green man on Mars. Do you think that's had
a negative effect on public support and financial
support for planetary travel? I think the public
fairly quickly forgets the negative results.
Certainly in the post-Viking era, I'm sure there
was a lot of public disappointment over Viking's
failure to find
life on Mars. On the other hand, I believe, as do
many, that the experiments designed for carrying
out a search for life on Mars were not optimized.
And at some point, we're going to go out and do it
again and hopefully do it right next time. And I
think when this program becomes common
knowledge, that once again, you'll see the public
lining up with great interest to see what comes out
of it. Thirty years ago, if this would be an
American Astronomical Society, meaning
everybody would be here. Since then, the
planetary astronomers, among others, have had
their own sub-society, the Division for
Planetary Sciences. American planetary
astronomers have their own journal now, Icarus.
Have these developments been good or bad for
planetary astronomy and astronomy in general? I
think it's been good for both. One sees the
occasional planetary astronomer or planetary
scientist at the full-up AAS meetings and an
occasional paper sometimes because it's just the
right time to present it. But getting planetary
astronomers together and getting their own
publication, I think, has been beneficial both to
the group as a whole and to astronomy in general.
Where are you now? Where am I now besides sitting
here talking to you? You mean my institutional
affiliation? Yes, I'm with the Institute for
Astronomy, University of Hawaii. How long have
you been there? I've been there almost three years
now. Where were you before that? Before that, I was
at the University of Arizona. I was there for 15
years. From when to when? From 1973, 74, I can't
remember exactly, until 1990. Okay, and what part
of the University of Arizona? Oh, in the planetary
sciences department. I also had a joint
appointment within the astronomy department.
One place that you're associated with, in my mind,
is New Mexico State University. And when did you
get associated with that? Well, my association
began, actually, when I went to work with Tombaugh
in 1955. When I got out of the Army in 1957, I elected
to stay on in Massachusetts and spent some time
working with Tombaugh. At that time, we were
supported by Air Force funds, and they were fairly
meager. So I spent a little time working with the
rocket facility at the Physical Sciences
Laboratory. But then shortly after that, NASA
came into existence, funding became available,
and I went back to doing astronomy again with
Tombaugh. Now, you folks built that up quite a bit.
How long were you at New Mexico State, and when did
you leave there? I was there for about 17, 18 years
from, well, as soon as I got out of the Army, 57,
until... So you can do the lift and kick workout,
right? Yeah, until 1973 or thereabouts. And you
actually built that up to a fairly good-sized
department, didn't you? We did, yeah. What's
happened to it since? It's still going. There's
still a fairly strong planetary commitment
there. Rita Beebe pretty much took over for me when
I left, and as the planetary patrol that we
initiated, back in the mid to late 50s is still
going and still being supported.
I should have asked you at the beginning, when were
you born and where? I was born in 1931 in Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
What do you think is the most important piece of
work in planetary astronomy that you've done? I
mean, either research or going to the department
or preventing a fight or whatever. Well, you know,
it's been a lot of things. I've been in this for a
long time, really getting old now. I mean, for
example, the planetary patrol that we initiated
almost immediately began to produce results just
because of the synoptic studies. We essentially
co-discovered the... the four-day rotation of
the high atmosphere winds on Venus. We discovered
the vortical nature, the rotation of the Great Red
Spot long before it was observed by Pioneer 10.
We
did work on the clouds of Mars and the formation of
high clouds over the volcanoes. All that was done
from the ground, but since that time I've been
involved with Mariner 6 and 7, Mariner 9, and
Viking, and finally Voyager. As far as scientific
accomplishment is concerned, Probably Voyager
just really has to be it. The enormous amount of
knowledge that came out of that program, the
success of that program, has certainly been a
highlight in my career. Do you think NASA gives
enough money for long-term data analysis after a
mission is over and the pretty pictures have
appeared in time? No, that's always been a
problem. It continues as a problem today. I think
that there are people at NASA who understand this
problem and are trying desperately to keep the
funding going. And there is an announcement right
now, for example, for Neptune's Voyager Neptune
science It's
just one of the first things to go when budget cuts
come in. You've already gotten the data, and if you
don't analyze it this year, well, theoretically,
you can do it next year or the year after. One would
hope that that situation, which is already
improving, will continue to improve. What's the
state of planetary astronomy today?
Planetary astronomy as such is... not in very good
shape. And it's really a result of the success of
the space program. Missions like Mariner,
Viking, Voyager have learned so much about the
planets that it's difficult to improve on that or
to add incrementally to ground-based
observations. Surely there's a lot of work that
can be done with small bodies, comets, asteroids.
These new objects that are being observed out in
the so-called Kuiper belt are extremely
interesting. And there are still good things that
can be done from the ground. The monitoring of the
volcanic activity on HEO is an example of that. But
it's not in the same place that it was back during
the 60s when almost everything you could do with
new instrumentation was new and discoveries were
being made one right after the other.
Could you give me a little summary of your
schooling? Yeah, I have a bachelor's degree in
chemical engineering. I got Northeastern
University in 1954.
I then went into the Army from there to New Mexico
State and probably set a record for the length of
time anyone has ever spent obtaining a PhD. I
started taking courses in physics very early on in
the late 50s. And then got much more serious about
it when the astronomy department was created in
Mexico State. Finally wrote my dissertation and
got my PhD in 1972. Do you think you talk to... Other
types of astronomers more than you did say 20 years
ago or about the same or less? A lot more. A lot more.
In fact, I'm really not doing very much in the way of
planetary work right now. I've gotten involved in
some other things. But yeah, I think my interest
has broadened considerably since I started. You
mentioned that there's still some looking down on
planetary work. Is there... Less of that than
there was 20 or 30 years ago or about the same? Very,
very much less.
I served for quite a number of years on the
Telescope Allocation Committee at the
University of Arizona. And everybody who has been
to Arizona is familiar with the arguments and the
fights that went on between Kuiper and Bach. I
mean, it's legendary. And the way the two sides of
the street looked at one another. But during the
time I spent on the TAC, I found that the so-called
astrophysical people, stellar galactic type but
very often speak up and support a proposal to do
planetary work just as much as the planetary
representatives. I think a lot of that has gone
away. These things still exist. You know, I
mentioned the cosmologists and the people who
really look out to Hi-Z, kind of looking down on
people who still poke around with globular
clusters in their own galaxy and so on. I think
these things will always exist. There's some
pecking order that gets established somewhere.
What has the American taxpayer got out of
planetary astronomy for the money they put in it?
Knowledge. Do you think it's really had an effect?
An effect on what? On the way people think about the
universe or themselves or anything? Absolutely
had an effect on the way people think about the
universe, without question.
I see that in talking to people on airplanes. I
mean, people really are a lot more savvy than a lot
of the scientists give them credit for, just
because. And I think NASA deserves an enormous
amount of credit for this, getting information
out and making it available to the public and
stimulating the production of various
television series that have gotten the same
information out to the public. It could be a lot
better, by the way. NASA could... could still
improve its relationship with the education
system in this country. But I think what they've
accomplished so far has been very effective. On a
personal note, when you meet somebody on an
airplane sitting next to them or something, you
tell them you're an astronomer, what's the
reaction you tend to get? Oh, sort of awe. Awe that
they are actually sitting right next to an
astronomer. Do I spend all my time up on Mauna Kea? A
few people realize that astronomers spend less
than 10% of their time collecting data and the
other 90% trying to understand what it was that
they got. But, yeah, it's, wow, you're an
astronomer. Wow, what's new in the universe? So
it's favorable. Oh, yeah, very, definitely.